Rewrite documentation - Main Concepts - Realtime Engine (#1847)
kuzzleio/kuzzle: doc/2/guides/main-concepts/5-realtime-engine/index.md

# Realtime Engine

> Kuzzle includes his **own high-performance Realtime Engine** for sending notifications to clients connected through the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle is shipped with its own **high-performance Realtime Engine** for sending notifications to clients connected through the API.
```

> Realtime capabilities requires the use of a **persistent communication protocol** such as WebSocket or MQTT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Realtime capabilities require the use of a **persistent communication protocol** such as WebSocket or MQTT.
```

Kuzzle offers 2 different ways of doing realtime:
 - Volatile Pub/Sub System (see example on [Kuzzle tech blog](https://blog.kuzzle.io/pub-sub-for-realtime-applications))
 - Realtime Database Notifications (see example on [Kuzzle tech blog](https://blog.kuzzle.io/develop-a-new-generation-of-apps-with-kuzzle-realtime-engine))

## Pub/Sub

Kuzzle's Realtime Engine allows you to do **Pub/Sub in dedicated communication channels called rooms**.

The process is as follows:
 - A first client subscribes to a particular room,

>  - A second client client posts a message in this room,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - A second client posts a message in that room,
```

Messages published with the [realtime:publish](/core/2/api/controllers/realtime/publish) method are not persisted in the database.
:::

## Database Notifications

Kuzzle's Realtime Engine allows you to **subscribe to notifications corresponding to changes in the database**.

::: info
You can bypass notifications from being triggered by using actions from the [bulk controller](/core/2/api/controllers/bulk).
:::

Subscription to a database changes is done via the [realtime:subscribe](/core/2/api/controllers/realtime/subscribe) method, taking 3 parameters:
 - Name of the index,
 - Name of the collection you want to watch,
 - Subscription filters contained in the `body` of the request.

::: info
The specified index and collection **must exist in the database** to receive database notifications.
:::

> When changes occur on this collection (eg: document creation, modification or deletion), Kuzzle will send notifications to the corresponding subscribers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When changes occur on this collection (e.g. document creation, modification or deletion), Kuzzle will send notifications to the corresponding subscribers.
```

First, we need to create the index and the collection and then subscribe to database notifications:

```bash
# Creates index and collection
$ kourou collection:create nyc-open-data yellow-taxi

> # Subscribe to database notifications

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Subscribes to database notifications
```

More information about the [Document Notification format](/core/2/api/essentials/notifications#documents-changes-messages)

## Subscription Filters

> When a client subscribes to realtime notifications, whether in Pub/Sub or Database Notification, he can **specify a set of subscription filters**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a client subscribes to realtime notifications, whether in Pub/Sub or Database Notification, they can **specify a set of subscription filters**.
```

More information about the [User Notification format](/core/2/api/essentials/notifications#user-notification)

### volatile

[Volatile Data](/core/2/api/essentials/volatile-data) are **metadata** that can be added to each request made to the Kuzzle API.

When a request containing volatile data triggers a realtime notification, these **volatile data are included in the notification that will be sent** to the subscribing clients.

First, subscribe to realtime notifications:
```bash
$ npx wscat -c ws://localhost:7512 --wait 300 --execute '{
  "controller": "realtime",
  "action": "subscribe",
  "index": "nyc-open-data",
  "collection": "yellow-taxi",
  "body": {}
}'
```

> Then, in another terminal you can publishes a message in the room specifying volatile data:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, in another terminal you can publish a message in the room specifying volatile data:
```

   "volatile": {
     "senderName": "Eru Ilúvatar"
   }
 }'
```

> Each client who subscribes to the room will receive the following notification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each client subscribing to the room will receive the following notification:
```

}
</pre>
</details>

::: info

> SDKs and Kourou use volatile data to send additional informations like the client name or version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SDKs and Kourou use volatile data to send additional information like the client name or version.
```
